i want you to hit me
as hard as you can
hi i'm luke ryan for joeblow.com and
welcome to movie endings explained where
we'll be taking a look at some of the
more ambiguous and discussed movie
endings that have left audiences
debating their true meaning
long after the credits have rolled this
time we're going to be looking at the
much discussed 2014 film
birdman directed by alejandro in arizu
and starring michael keaton in the lead
role the film
swept the awards season earning keaton a
golden globe for best actor
an academy award nomination for best
actor as well as winning oscars for best
film
best cinematography best screenplay and
best director
it's almost undeniably a great film
which follows keaton's character riggan
thompson a down on his luck actor who
once had mainstream fame in the birdman
superhero franchise
but is now struggling to be relevant
writing directing and starring in a
broadway play based on the raymond
carver's short story
what we talk about when we talk about
love the birdman aspect plays in well
with michael keaton's previous role as
batman in the 80s and 90s but
beyond that cute meta-like reference
this film is much more of a
deconstruction of rigging thompson's
psyche
the film presents us with fantastical
moments where riggan imagines his
birdman alter ego
taunting him and we hear his inner
birdman inside his head too
alejandro inorito injects the story with
magic realism in which a story that's
told in as serious of a nature as
possible
but with moments that defy real life the
opening shot of the film shows riggan
floating in his dressing room his inner
birdman asking him how they ended up
there
how did we end up here are we supposed
to believe that riggan is actually
floating
or was he imagining himself floating
perhaps it was more meant to show his
current state of mind his
feeling of superiority a symbol of his
ego ego plays a huge part in the story
and by the climax of the film and of
course
spoilers you've been warned riggan
shoots his nose off on stage
or does he the last scene of the film
depicts riggan in a hospital bed his
nose bandaged and the fame he so
desperately wanted back in his life
rekindled the events of the film take
riggan through a roller coaster of
emotions and the final scene
shows him at peace where he then decides
to step out onto the window ledge of his
hospital room
to apparently commit suicide this is
where the debate over the ending of
birdman really sparks up
we cut away from rigging on the ledge to
sam his daughter played by emma stone
she rushes to the open window and looks
up and smiles
the end now the most cut and dry way to
view this ending considering the earlier
scene where riggan is flying around new
york
is that reagan has actually taken flight
and that his moments of apparent fantasy
throughout the film
were actually real he had those powers
and now the world would see them
there are many different ways to
interpret this ending though but before
we dive into the possibilities here's
what the director had to say
about the way the audience perceives the
ending of birdman alejandro inoritu said
at the ending of the film it can be
interpreted as many ways as there are
seats in the theater
so clearly innuritu wants the perception
of the ending of birdman and indeed the
entire film
to be subject to the viewers own
opinions and feelings so what are some
of the options besides the fairly
unsatisfying theory that reagan actually
flies away for real
well one possibility is that he didn't
shoot his nose off at the end of his
play
but he actually killed himself and that
the final hospital scene
is either a hallucination during his
final moments of mortality
or what he imagined a happy ending to
his inner turmoil could be
given the ambiguity of birdman it's
worth considering but i don't think it
holds much weight and the whole
it's a dream idea just feels weak to me
another scenario could be that riggan
had no superpowers at all and we're
seeing either an artistic representation
of how he's feeling in those magical
moments
or he's hallucinating them himself due
to insanity
in a scene where he trashes his dressing
room we see him throwing objects around
without touching
them when his manager comes in to see
what the fuss is all about
we enter his perspective and see riggan
physically handling things
you can even see some blood on riggan's
hand which suggests he was smashing up
everything
with his hands then there's the where he
flies back to the theater
and no one is even looking at this
astonishing feat of supernatural power
along with a cabbie asking for his money
hello sir you did not pay me
these moments make it perfectly clear
that riggan's powers aren't to be taken
too literally
however it's worth taking into account
the unique structure of birdman
from the opening shot of riggan floating
to the moment he shoots himself on stage
the entire film is made to look like one
flowing take that is unbroken
that's an hour and 39 minutes of a
distinct visual aesthetic
after rigging shoots himself the film
begins to cut
with bizarre imagery flashing on screen
the recurring image of a meteor
flying across the skies seems to suggest
something
while the shot of jellyfish beached on
the sand could allude to riggan's story
of trying to drown himself
the sudden inclusion of cutting in a
film so heavily entrenched in a one-take
concept
surely points to a significant change in
the film but whether that means the
reality has changed
or riggen's state of mind has changed is
the real question
his nose has been reconstructed after
the accident and it now resembles a beak
now it seems unlikely that a nose
transplant would look so normal so
quickly
so should we take this scene as real or
a cruel twist of fate tying him to the
delusion of birdman forever
he sees birdman one more time in the
bathroom and before he takes to the
window ledge he tells him this
now this clearly tells us he's done with
birdman being a part of his life
maybe he's realized that even after
achieving success once again
and sharing a loving moment with his
daughter in a relationship that was so
strained of love before
birdman is still there no matter what he
does and so the only way to free himself
is to end his life
considering he talks about having tried
to kill himself before it's not that
much of a leap
riggan is not a stable man by any means
he seems so oddly at peace with it if
that is indeed what he is about to do
yet we never see him jump when sam
rushes to the window we can hear sirens
outside which seems to surely be there
to tell us he jumped to his demise
but it seems fishy that any kind of
emergency service would arrive a mere
half minute after he fell
sam even looks down in fear but she
doesn't react to anything shocking
instead turning her eyes upwards a smile
of disbelief and wonder
forming on her face
so what did sam see exactly maybe she
saw the meteor that had been flashing on
screen throughout the film
that outcome feels very unlikely to me
so does riggan killing himself
one of his struggles throughout the film
is how he views love his ex-wife telling
him that he always seems to confuse love
with admiration
and realizing that he had people close
to him that loved him as a key part of
his progression by the end of the film
the theory that i tend to lean more
towards is that riggan didn't actually
fly
out of the window much like he never
flew around the city or any other number
of fantastical moments we see in the
film
and that his final flight is a pure
artistic expression
of his final transformation you could
look at it as sam perceiving his change
in the same magical way as he perceived
himself
in either a symbolic way or a literal
one with his daughter suffering from the
same kind of delusions as her father
some even believe that the ending could
be a hallucination of sam's which plays
somewhat into her backstory of being a
recovering drug addict
it would also lend some weight to the
sudden cuts after riggan shoots himself
as the last images that flash through
his mind
before we enter the perspective of sam
and her own personal delirium in coping
with her father's suicide
one thing's for sure there is no real
answer to what the ending of birdman
definitively means
but the ending of birdman as we see it
wasn't the way the film
always closed out alejandro in narita
said that he hated the original ending
of birdman commenting that
it had a different ending but in the
middle of shooting i knew it was a piece
of [ __ ]
i felt it and the film began to breathe
by itself and i'm so happy that i
changed it
now i feel very good about the ending it
feels very fair
so what was the original ending well
while innuritu kept quiet about it
alexander dinolairis jr one of the
film's four writers was more open to
sharing
the original ending would show riggan
appearing on a charlie rose-esque show
following the incident where he shot
himself on stage the play having gone
down as a big hit
then as dinolairis reveals the camera
prowled like it did the whole film went
backstage
through the halls we've seen the whole
time and we'd get to the dressing room
where literally johnny depp
would be sitting looking in the mirror
and putting on his rigging thompson wig
and then the poster of pirates of the
caribbean five would be in the back
in jack sparrow's voice it would say
what the [ __ ] are we doing here mate
it was going to be the satire of the
endless loop of that now while that's a
cute spin on the story it definitely
would have felt like the film was
selling itself short to me
tacked on at best dinolaires also
commented on the ambiguity of the film's
new ending saying
we're not going to sit around and
explain the ending we thought if we
answered that question at the end it
would seem very very small
is he famous because he shot himself
that small is he still miserable
that small everything seemed small
another co-writer of birdman nicholas
jackabone said
i'm still trying to figure it out so in
this case the ending of birdman really
is
exactly what you make of it one of the
great freedoms of art is that you can
not only get what the artist put into it
but what you put into it as well
with your own experiences ideals and
emotional reactions
my verdict i like to think that the
alleged reality of rigging flying at the
end of the film pales in comparison to
the emotions of the characters and the
outcome of the story
the sense of ore in sam's eyes is a
powerful image and supersedes any
skepticism i could ever have
about whether or not it's actually real
feel free to chime in down below with
your thoughts on the ending of birdman
we'd love to hear your theories
and thanks for watching
[Music]
you